9 Dodge when Allan Pinkerton withdrew
from the intelligence field in 1862
Lafayette Baker became his heir in the
East in the West the principal
benefactor of Pinkertons legacy was
Grenville M Dodge born in a
Massachusetts farmhouse in 1831 he
attended the Durham Academy New
Hampshire Norwich University of Vermont
and matriculated from partridges private
school in 1851 with a degree in civil
and military engineering prior to the
Civil War he held various surveying
positions with Western Railroad
companies with the outbreak of
hostilities
he served in a military capacity on the
Iowa governor's staff before becoming a
colonel of the 4th Iowa regiment he saw
a heavy fighting in the southwest and
distinguished himself in combat with the
result that in March of 1862 he was
advanced to Brigadier General dodge was
introduced to intelligence operations in
late 1861 when General John C Fremont
the commander of Missouri ordered him to
investigate certain rumors regarding
rebel activity in the area
it is not evident that he had prior
familiarity with this type of duty but
it is possible that his surveying
positions had acquainted him with the
techniques of frontier Scouts and
railroad detectives in response to
Fremont's order dodge sent his cavalry
into all parts of the state spent two
months in the pursuit exhausting many
horses and riders from this experience
he decided to maintain a few men in the
field who knew Arkansas and Missouri
paying them with money received from
fines and licenses thus began his spy
network a system subsequently credited
with saving the army of the southwest in
March 1862 from advancing Confederate
forces quote while rebuilding the mobile
and Ohio Railroad Dodge again sent
agents into the field he concluded that
most of the rumors he heard were false
but about this time
he hit upon a method by which a spy
could estimate
the size of any enemy force by noting
the space it occupied on a road before
long dodge was receiving detailed
descriptions of Confederate troops
throughout the south end quote in July
1862 Major General Henry W Halleck
became General in chief of the US Army
opening the way for a major intelligence
role for Dodge quote when Halleck went
east and grant succeeded to the command
in the West the hour had come for
guessing and blundering through to give
way to strategy and even to cunning no
one knew the strength of the south and
the Confederates fought as if they had
plenty of reserve
moreover rumors were everywhere about
the superior strength they would bring
to bear in the Vicksburg campaign at
hand it was thought that there were
60,000 Confederates south of grant and
nearly as many to the east of him a
loose and inefficient system of secret
service in the first 18 months of the
war had left the federal officers in the
West believing no one it was to obviate
this condition and to secure authentic
information that General Grant turned to
general dodge and gave him the
responsibility of reorganizing the whole
system end quote
Dodge came to his new assignment at the
recommendation of General John a Rawlins
grant's chief of staff and had not
actually met with the new commander of
the western troops in his new role dodge
had two forces he organized the first
Tennessee Cavalry a regiment of southern
unionists who served in the Regular Army
by virtue of their relatives and friends
and the Confederacy members of this unit
contributed to dodges clandestine spy
network with contacts and informers he
also utilized many blacks who
disregarded by southern pickets and
patrols functioned as messengers quote
dodges system brought headaches as well
as rewards financial troubles were
especially severe for a spy commencing a
long trip was
usually given between 5,000 and 10,000
dollars in Confederate money
moreover dodge paid his spies for each
mission those who lived permanently
within enemy lines received what they
requested although some of them refused
compensation because they were unionists
or because their sons brothers or
husbands or in the Federal Army and a
quote in early 1863 the economic problem
was solved when Grant authorized the use
of confiscated Confederate funds to
maintain the spy network at its peak
dodges intelligence system counted 117
field agents known personally only to
him and familiar to his most trusted
aides only by an identifying number this
situation created certain accountability
problems once dodges immediate superior
cut off his funds when the identities of
the spies were refused for reasons of
security but the matter was appealed to
Grant who taking time from his Vicksburg
campaign reinstated the funding another
time dodge was charged with land cotton
speculation for financially enhancing
his spies and/or himself the dilemma was
such that in refuting the allegation the
identities of certain agents operating
behind Confederate lines might become
known and dodge decided at Grant's
suggestion to remain silent about the
matter for many years thereafter however
accusations about the charges dogged him
quote during the war about half of
dodges spies were captured or killed by
the enemy some were court-martialed and
executed by the Confederates but not one
betrayed the north although to save
their lives many pretended to do so
forced to join the southern army one
agent within a short time was made first
sergeant of his company for a year Dodge
believed he was dead late in the war
however the spy still dressed in his
Confederate uniform slipped through the
lines and again reported for duty end
quote
dodj proved to be a shrewd spymaster
disguising his operations and utilizing
the information he gained for the best
possible military advantages
he emphasized geographic data and
details regarding weapon and troop
strength in his intelligence activities
dodge was grants general and when grant
was given command of all Union forces in
March 1864 the Secret Service force
began to be phased out in August in the
battle for Atlanta dodge was severely
wounded and temporarily retired from
active duty during this time the
intelligence network he had built
terminated completely and no directive
for reinstatement ever revived it dodge
returned to military service in November
and finished war duty he later fought in
Indian skirmishes before turning his
attention to politics and railroad
development in 1866 he served in the
House of Representatives declining reen
AMA nation in 1868 he subsequently
became active in railroad construction
was president of the Union Pacific
Denver and Gulf Line in 1892 and even
promoted railroads in Cuba before his
death in 1916 in his intelligence
activities dodge reflects military
professionalism he sought information
almost exclusively to enhance Army Field
Operations and to develop effective
strategy for pursuing the Confederate
fighting forces
[Music]
this is our hidden history
you